---
title: "DNS CAA Resource Record Property for IP Address Certificates"
abbrev: "IP-CAA"
category: std
submissiontype: IETF

docname: draft-chariton-ipcaa-00
v: 3
area: Security
workgroup: Limited Additional Mechanisms for PKIX and SMIME
keyword: lamps
ipr: trust200902
venue:
  group: WG
  type: Working Group
  mail: spasm@ietf.org
  arch: https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/lamps/about/
  github: daknob/draft-chariton-ipcaa
  latest: https://daknob.github.io/draft-chariton-ipcaa/

updates: 8659, 6844

author:
 -
    fullname: Antonios A. Chariton
    organization: Google
    email: aac@google.com

normative:

informative:

--- abstract

This document specifies a new DNS CAA Resource Record Property that allows an
IP Address holder to specify one or more Certification Authorities (CAs)
authorized to issue certificates for that IP Address. 

--- middle

# Introduction

The CAA Resource Records specified in {{!RFC8659}} allow a domain holder to
limit the CAs that are authorized to issue certificates for that domain.
However, there is no mechanism to provide the same functionality for IP
Addresses that can be included in certificates.

This document specifies a new Property for CAA records that exist in the
Reverse DNS Zones that can achieve the same effect.

A new Property is required so as not to interfere with certificate issuance for
the subdomains of these two zones, and `issue` and `issuewild` continue to be
valid.

# Conventions and Definitions

## Requirements Language
{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

## Defined Terms
This document uses the same defined terms as Section 2.2 of {{!RFC8659}}. The
following term is redefined in this document:

Relevant Resource Record Set (Relevant RRset):
: A set of CAA Resource Records resulting from calculating the IP Address
Reverse DNS FQDN for an IP Address.

The following terms are additionally defined:

IP Address:
: An IPv6 or IPv4 address.

Reverse DNS Zones:
: The DNS zones ip6.arpa and in-addr.arpa.

IP Address Reverse DNS FQDN:
: The FQDN that corresponds to an IP Address within the Reverse DNS Zones that
can be calculated by using the algorithms described in Section 2.5 of
{{!RFC3596}} and Section 3.5 of {{!RFC1035}}.

# Relevant Resource Record Set
In order to determine the Relevant RRset, a compliant CA must calculate the
IP Address Reverse DNS FQDN.

Then, it must apply the algorithm specified in Section 3 of {{!RFC8659}} for
the calculated FQDN. The search stops at the Reverse DNS Zones, but does not
include them.

# CAA ip Property
If the `ip` Property Tag is present in the Relevant RRset for an IP Address, it
is a request that Issuers:

1. Perform CAA issue restriction processing for the IP Address, and
2. Grant authorization to issue certificates containing that IP Address to the
holder of the issuer-domain-name or a party acting under the explicit authority
of the holder of the issuer-domain-name.

The CAA `ip` Property Value has the following sub-syntax (specified in ABNF as
per {{!RFC5234}}):

~~~
issue-value = *WSP [issuer-domain-name *WSP]
   [";" *WSP [parameters *WSP]]

issuer-domain-name = label *("." label)
label = (ALPHA / DIGIT) *( *("-") (ALPHA / DIGIT))

parameters = (parameter *WSP ";" *WSP parameters) / parameter
parameter = tag *WSP "=" *WSP value
tag = (ALPHA / DIGIT) *( *("-") (ALPHA / DIGIT))
value = *(%x21-3A / %x3C-7E)
~~~

The following CAA RRset requests that no certificates be issued for the IP
Address "2001:db8::1" by any Issuer other than ca1.example.net:

~~~
1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.8.b.d.0.1.0.0.2.ip6.arpa
                                              CAA 0 ip "ca1.example.net"
~~~

The following CAA RRset requests that no certificates be issued for the IP
Address "192.0.2.2" by any Issuer other than ca2.example.org:

~~~
2.2.0.192.in-addr.arpa  CAA 0 ip "ca2.example.org"
~~~

The following CAA RRset requests that no certificates be issued for the IP
Address "192.0.2.1" by any Issuer other than ca1.example.net, and that no
certificates be issued for the domain "1.2.0.192.in-addr.arpa" by any Issuer
other than ca2.example.org:

~~~
1.2.0.192.in-addr.arpa  CAA 0 ip    "ca1.example.net"
1.2.0.192.in-addr.arpa  CAA 0 issue "ca2.example.org"
~~~

An `ip` Property Tag where the issue-value does not match the ABNF grammar MUST
be treated the same as one specifying an empty issuer-domain-name. For
example, the following malformed CAA RRset forbids issuance:

~~~
e.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.8.b.d.0.1.0.0.2.ip6.arpa
                                                        CAA 0 ip "%%%%%"
~~~

The CAA `ip` Property Tag MUST be ignored if the FQDN is not a valid IP Address
Reverse DNS FQDN.

An Issuer MAY choose to specify parameters that further constrain the issue of
certificates by that Issuer -- for example, specifying that certificates are to
be subject to specific validation policies, billed to certain accounts, or
issued under specific trust anchors.

For example, if ca1.example.net has requested that its customer that wants a
certificate with the IP Address 192.0.2.32 specified their account number
"110995" in each of the customer's CAA records using the (CA-defined) "account"
parameter, it would look like this:

~~~
32.2.0.192.in-addr.arpa  CAA 0 issue "ca1.example.net; account=110995"
~~~

# Security Considerations
The same Security Considerations described in Section 5 of {{!RFC8659}} apply
to this document. On top of these, as the IP Address Reverse DNS FQDN is not
checked by CAs that do not comply to this document, the critical flag,
described in Section 4.5 of {{!RFC8659}}, may have reduced efficacy.

# Deployment Considerations
The same Deployment Considerations described in Section 6 of {{!RFC8659}} apply
to this document. On top of these, deployment of CAA `ip` Property Tags will
increase the amount of DNS queries required when issuing certificates for IPv6
addresses, as it can include up to 32 DNS queries to the ip6.arpa zone if there
are no Relevant RRsets.

# IANA Considerations
The "Certification Authority Restriction Properties" registry needs to be
updated to include the following entry:

Tag:
: ip

Meaning:
: Authorization Entry by IP Address

Reference:
: This document

--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}
